SEP-2663: Tasks Extension (#2663)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: seps/2663-tasks-extension.md

Tasks will become a foundational building block of MCP and are expected to be supported in future protocol versions. The experimental `tasks` feature in the `2025-11-25` specification served as a stopgap until the protocol's extension mechanism was available. Now that [extensions](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/extensions/overview) have been [formalized](./2133-extensions.md), moving tasks to an official extension gives the feature time to incubate and evolve based on additional real-world implementation feedback, without being constrained by the core specification's release cadence. Once the extension has stabilized and achieved broad adoption, it is intended to be promoted into the core protocol.

> This proposal _removes_ the version of [tasks](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/utilities/tasks) specified in the `2025-11-25` release. It is shaped by implementation feedback since that release, and by several changes to the base protocol included in the `2026-06-30` specification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal _removes_ the version of [tasks](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/utilities/tasks) specified in the `2025-11-25` release from the core protocol and moves it to an Extension. It also proposes updates to Tasks shaped by implementation feedback since that release, and by several changes to the base protocol included in the `2026-06-30` specification:
```

   *
   * This MAY be exposed to the end-user or model.
   */
  statusMessage?: string;

  /** ISO 8601 timestamp when the task was created. */
  createdAt: string;

  /** ISO 8601 timestamp when the task was last updated. */
  lastUpdatedAt: string;

  /**
   * Time-to-live duration from creation in integer milliseconds, null for unlimited.
   * The server may discard the task after the TTL elapses. This value MAY change
   * over the lifetime of a task.
   */
  ttlMs: number | null;

  /**
   * Suggested polling interval in integer milliseconds. Clients SHOULD honor
   * this value to avoid overwhelming the server. This value MAY change over
   * the lifetime of a task.
   */
  pollIntervalMs?: number;

  /**
   * Optional opaque state passed back from the server to the client as a
   * best-effort optimization (e.g. routing hint, cached metadata).
   * Servers MAY return a different value on each task-bearing message
   * (`CreateTaskResult`, `tasks/get`, `notifications/tasks/status`);
   * clients MUST echo the most recently received value on the next request.
   * Servers MUST tolerate receiving a stale value gracefully.
   */

>   requestState?: string;

Reviewer: why are we returning this as part of the Task itself? 

With MRTR I would assume we would just pass it back as part of the input_reuquired result. 

How is the client passing this back?

Author: Removing for now: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f1c3cfc6ae7049d235b7b23d16229cbce6679a8

}

/**
 * A task that is in a normal working state.
 * Used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status.
 */
export interface WorkingTask extends Task {
  status: "working";
}

/**
 * A task that is waiting for input from the client.
 * Used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status.
 */
export interface InputRequiredTask extends Task {
  status: "input_required";
  /**
   * Server-to-client requests that need to be fulfilled during task execution.
   * Keys are arbitrary identifiers for matching requests to responses.
   */

>   inputRequests: InputRequests;

Reviewer: should we just move requestState here?

Author: Removing for now: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f1c3cfc6ae7049d235b7b23d16229cbce6679a8

 * Used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status.
 */
export interface CompletedTask extends Task {
  status: "completed";
  /**
   * The final result of the task.
   * The structure matches the result type of the original request.
   * For example, a CallToolRequest task would return the CallToolResult structure.
   */
  result: JSONObject;
}

/**
 * A task that has failed due to a JSON-RPC error.
 * Used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status.
 */
export interface FailedTask extends Task {
  status: "failed";
  /**
   * The JSON-RPC error that caused the task to fail.
   */
  error: JSONObject;
}

/**
 * A task that has been cancelled.
 * Used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status.
 */
export interface CancelledTask extends Task {
  status: "cancelled";
}

/**
 * A union type representing a task with optional inlined result/error/inputRequests fields.
 * This type is used by tasks/get and notifications/tasks/status to provide complete task state
 * including terminal results or pending input requests.
 */
export type DetailedTask =
  | WorkingTask
  | InputRequiredTask
  | CompletedTask
  | FailedTask
  | CancelledTask;
```

#### Request State Management

> Servers **MAY** set an optional `requestState` string on any `Task` object to pass opaque routing or state information back to the client. When a client receives a `Task` with a `requestState` value, it **MUST** echo back the exact value of that field in the `requestState` field of subsequent `tasks/get`, `tasks/update`, and `tasks/cancel` requests for the same task. The server can use this echoed value to recover routing context or cache task metadata without maintaining per-task server-side session data, enabling stateless, load-balanced deployments. `requestState` is a best-effort optimization — servers **MUST NOT** depend on receiving the latest value for correctness, and **MUST** tolerate receiving a stale or outdated value gracefully (e.g. by falling back to a canonical lookup).

Reviewer: Do we have a real use case for this? seems like its adding some weird complexity since all the state is supposed to be associated with the taskId.

Also its unclear how this interacts on the get vs the update methods (i.e. cancel, input, etcc)...

Reviewer: @markdroth would love your thoughts here

Author: Removing for now: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f1c3cfc6ae7049d235b7b23d16229cbce6679a8

To prevent replay, servers **SHOULD** include the following inside the integrity-protected `requestState` payload and verify each on receipt:

- The authenticated principal, rejecting state presented by a different principal.
- A short expiry (TTL), rejecting state presented after it lapses.
- An identifier for the originating request, e.g. the method name and a digest of its salient parameters, rejecting state presented on a request that does not match.

<Warning>

Note that these measures bound the replay window and prevent cross-user and cross-task reuse, but do not by themselves guarantee isolation. Servers for which a given `requestState` must be consumed at most once (e.g., one-time redemptions) **MUST** enforce that invariant server-side.

</Warning>

> Servers **MAY** return a different `requestState` value on each task-bearing message (`CreateTaskResult`, `tasks/get`, `notifications/tasks/status`); clients **MUST** always use the most recently received value in their next request. If the most recent task-bearing message contained no `requestState`, the client **MUST NOT** include it in the next request. However, because multiple `tasks/get` requests or `notifications/tasks/status` notifications may be in flight concurrently, the value a client tracks as "most recently received" reflects client-side arrival order, which may differ from server-side generation order. Servers **MUST** therefore accept any `requestState` value they have previously issued for a given task, not only the most recent one, and **MUST NOT** use `requestState` rotation as a correctness mechanism (e.g. sequence enforcement). `UpdateTaskResult` and `CancelTaskResult` are empty acknowledgements and do not carry `requestState`, so the server cannot rotate state through write operations — the next `tasks/get` after an update will necessarily echo the pre-update value.

Reviewer: This whole paragraph kind of proves the this is very complex to do anything useful with.

Author: Removing for now: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f1c3cfc6ae7049d235b7b23d16229cbce6679a8

> # SEP-2663: Tasks Extension

Reviewer 2: The SEP should do:
1. Asks for creation of the tasks extensions as an official extensions
2. Define who is governing the extensions (which working group, and does the group have a charter?)
3. Either define or refer to a SEP that removes Tasks from the existing spec (preferably the first).

Author: Marked as Agents WG in header, clarified that this removes Tasks as they exist today from the spec: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/c54e5eee465e62bf16f76145158584fa8401e835

- **Status**: In-Review
- **Type**: Extensions Track
- **Created**: 2026-04-27
- **Author(s)**: Luca Chang (@LucaButBoring), Caitie McCaffrey (@CaitieM20)
- **Sponsor**: Caitie McCaffrey (@CaitieM20)
- **Extension Identifier**: `io.modelcontextprotocol/tasks`
- **PR**: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663

## Abstract

> This SEP defines an extension that allows a server respond to a `tools/call` request with an asynchronous _task handle_ instead of a final result, allowing the client to retrieve the eventual result by polling. The extension introduces three methods: `tasks/get`, `tasks/update`, and `tasks/cancel`; a polymorphic-result discriminator (`resultType: "task"`); and a `Task` shape that carries a task status, in-progress server-to-client requests, and a final result or error. Task creation is server-directed: the client signals support by negotiating the extension during `initialize`, and the server decides on a per-request basis whether to materialize a task.

Reviewer: We should add a note at the top of the abstract explaining why we are moving tasks to extension. 

- Experimental was a stop gap state until we had Extensions. 
- Tasks is still evolving, and therefore we want to give it time to incubate as an official extension
- We plan to move Tasks into core protocol once it stabilizes and has adoption

We want to make sure this SEP communicates that we still believe Tasks is important and expect it to be supported in future versions.

Author: Added: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/c54e5eee465e62bf16f76145158584fa8401e835

> This proposal supersedes the version of [tasks](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/utilities/tasks) specified in the `2025-11-25` release. It is shaped by implementation feedback since that release and by several changes to the base protocol expected to arrive in the `2026-06-30` specification:

Reviewer: Is supercedes the right term here? What's the expected behavior with 2025-11-25 being the negotiated version? if the Task extension is also declared? I would argue that they should just use the existing Tasks in the spec, and ignore the extension, or we declare a bad request.  

I think we need to add that the Experimental feature Tasks is explicitly being removed from the 2026-06-30 protocol.

Author: This is partially covered in the Backwards Compatibility section - this would be gated by protocol version - but I do think that's missing a lot of detail, I'll adjust it.

Author: Updated backwards-compatibility notes: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/cbb156cfd4103500a1125ad8d6e61bf0a2279b23

Noted removal of current form: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/commit/c54e5eee465e62bf16f76145158584fa8401e835

- The `tasks.requests.*` and `tasks.cancel`/`tasks.list` capability declarations are not part of this extension. A server that previously advertised these **MUST** migrate to declaring `io.modelcontextprotocol/tasks` and **MUST NOT** continue to advertise the legacy capabilities under any protocol version that includes this extension.
- The result polymorphism — `CallToolResult` or `CreateTaskResult` in response to `tools/call` — is gated on extension negotiation. Under earlier protocol versions or without negotiation, a server **MUST NOT** return `CreateTaskResult`.

Implementations that need to bridge legacy clients **SHOULD** shim at the SDK level: a server can implement both the experimental and extension surfaces in parallel during the migration window, dispatching based on which capability the client negotiated.

A server that returns the standard `CallToolResult` shape — i.e., never elects to create a task — remains fully spec-compliant under this extension. Clients that have negotiated the extension **MUST** handle both result shapes for any augmented request.

> ## Security Implications

Reviewer 3: There's *a lot* we need to be saying around security of `requestState`. It's an attack vector that's very tricky to get right and we need to be providing strong guidance here to server developers so that we avoid inevitable CVE when people implement this incorrectly.

See https://github.com/CaitieM20/modelcontextprotocol/pull/15/changes#diff-26af496c9192ec41631112c71cdb611699acd6ec6ce935f26bbc51ffbc59b34eR222-R227 for what was suggested for MRTR.

Author: Updated, reused most of the wording with slight changes for tasks: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes#diff-2e7f93ac86b464c6dac0953ccf0614adb4c2a1e3b12ee533910b87924a30eeadR300-R310

### Polymorphic Results

A request that is eligible for task-augmentation may return one of two distinct result shapes — the request's standard result, or a `CreateTaskResult`. The discriminator is the `resultType` field on the result object, introduced by [SEP-2322](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2322):

```typescript
// "task" is introduced by this extension.
type ResultType = "complete" | "incomplete" | "task";
```

Servers **MUST** set `resultType` to `"task"` when returning a `CreateTaskResult` so that clients can distinguish it from a standard result. Servers **MUST NOT** set `resultType` to `"task"` on result types other than `CreateTaskResult`.

Client implementors are advised that existing code returning a fixed shape (e.g., a `tools/call` method returning `CallToolResult`) need not change their public contract — they can transparently drive the polling flow internally and surface only the final, completed result. New implementation surfaces **MAY** expose the task lifecycle directly for applications able to leverage it.

### Tasks

> A `Task` carries operational metadata about ongoing work. Derived shapes inline status-specific payload fields and are used by `tasks/get` responses and `notifications/tasks/status` notifications:

Reviewer 3: Where does `notifications/tasks/status` come from? Is it on the SSE stream for `tasks/get` (and other tasks requests?) -- if so, we should be clear about it and also explain why we're not just letting the `tasks/get` complete with the status.

Author: Yes, it's on the `tasks/get` SSE stream. Missed this in the rewrite, just pushed the change: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/commits/ed4c83e5147db9986ebd8e42a61e4e8d3557b9da

To prevent replay, servers **SHOULD** include the following inside the integrity-protected `requestState` payload and verify each on receipt:

- The authenticated principal, rejecting state presented by a different principal.
- A short expiry (TTL), rejecting state presented after it lapses.
- An identifier for the originating request, e.g. the method name and a digest of its salient parameters, rejecting state presented on a request that does not match.

<Warning>
Note that these measures bound the replay window and prevent cross-user and cross-task reuse, but do not by themselves guarantee isolation. Servers for which a given `requestState` must be consumed at most once (e.g., one-time redemptions) **MUST** enforce that invariant server-side.
</Warning>

> Servers **MAY** return a different `requestState` value on each task-bearing message (`CreateTaskResult`, `tasks/get`, `notifications/tasks/status`); clients **MUST** always use the most recently received value in their next request. If the most recent task-bearing message contained no `requestState`, the client **MUST NOT** include it in the next request. Servers that include `requestState` **SHOULD** encrypt it to protect confidentiality and integrity, and **MUST** validate any received `requestState` before acting on it. Upon receiving a `notifications/tasks/status` notification for a task status update, clients **MUST** update their tracked `requestState` value with any value provided in the notification, as they would do with a standard response.

Reviewer 3: The SEP says servers "MAY return a different `requestState` value on each task-bearing message" and clients "MUST always use the most recently *received* value." A few issues:

### 1. "Most recently received" is client-arrival order, not server-generation order

Two in-flight `tasks/get` requests are independent HTTP POSTs with no response-ordering guarantee:

```
get#1(S0) ──► server responds (state=S1)
get#2(S0) ──► server responds (state=S2)
  ◄── response #2 (S2)
  ◄── response #1 (S1)      ← arrives last; client now tracks S1
```

If `requestState` carries routing (the SEP's own `{"serverId":"node-42"}` example), the next request goes to the wrong place and the client can't detect it.

This gets even more perilous with `notifications/tasks/status` in the mix.

### 2. `UpdateTaskResult` can't rotate state

`UpdateTaskResult` is an empty ack — no `Task`, no `requestState`. So even a strictly serial client does:

```
get(S0)    → input_required, S1
update(S1) → {}
get(S1)    → working, S2      ← unavoidable poll with pre-update state
```

The server has no choice but to accept S1 on that follow-up poll. Any server design where processing the input invalidates S1 breaks the happy path, not just under races.

### 3. What actually needs rotation?

Working through the use cases:

- **Routing hint** — set once at creation; if tasks migrate workers, a `taskId → worker` registry must exist anyway and `requestState` is just a cache in front of it.
- **Auth/tenancy binding** — set once, never changes.
- **External job-token passthrough** — only safe if the upstream accepts stale tokens, in which case the MCP layer inherits that tolerance rather than providing it.
- **Continuation-passing at `input_required`** — the one case that genuinely needs rotation, and the one the protocol can't express because of (2).

Every case that works either doesn't need rotation or only works because stale values are tolerated.

---

I think we need some clarity around the intended use cases for `requestState` rotation and how these are intended to work under races (or how we intend to avoid races). Alternatively, reframe `requestState` as a cache hint, not a correctness mechanism.

If continuation-passing at `input_required` is a target use case, `UpdateTaskResult` needs to carry a `Task` (or at least `requestState`) so the server can return the post-input state atomically with the ack. Even then, it can only work if we can guarantee that it never races with another in-flight `tasks/get` or `notifications/tasks/status`.

Author: The server does not handle `tasks/update` or `tasks/cancel` atomically - I did have an answer to this general question [here](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2557#discussion_r3119615305):

> [The client needs to be] Last writer wins, and the server needs to reconcile that. Functionally, this should be no different from the non-parallel case where the client polls less frequently than the state is updating; eventually the server needs to handle the client's last-seen `requestState` potentially being out of sync with some upstream source of truth.

The limit case I'm considering is where `requestState` holds the entire task state to allow the server to not have any dedicated task store (it relies fully on some external workflow API). That use case requires rotation, and due to the inherent asynchronicity here it also requires the server to be tolerant of stale values.

Reviewer 3: > The limit case I'm considering is where requestState holds the entire task state to allow the server to not have any dedicated task store (it relies fully on some external workflow API). That use case requires rotation, and due to the inherent asynchronicity here it also requires the server to be tolerant of stale values.

But how does that work? Could you give an example of the kind of state that would update and what would it update based on? It can't update based on elicitation response, and the only other thing the client sends are gets, so what is driving the state changes if not some server state (i.e. task store)?

Author: Consider a case where an MCP server exposes a `do_workflow` tool backed by a task. The MCP server has no state store of its own, and relies solely on a workflow API (like Step Functions etc.) for its underlying work:

1. The MCP client calls `do_workflow`. The MCP server begins a workflow execution and receives the upstream execution ARN.
2. The server uses the execution ARN (encrypted) as the task ID directly. It can use this to request the upstream execution state later. We'll map most task state from the execution metadata, but the one thing we can't know (without an additional data store) is what the last state the _client has seen_ is. We can use `requestState` as a cheap way to deal with the poll interval in clients polling faster than expected by caching the execution metadata in it. The server returns a `CreateTaskResult` to the client with the current time and the initial execution state encoded in a blob, encrypted with a private key like the task ID is.
3. When the client polls, it includes its last seen `requestState` value. Typically, we just update it with the current time and execution metadata again and return that in `GetTaskResult`.
4. When the client polls faster than that, we detect it by checking the encoded value, but are able to be tolerant of it by simply returning the cached data and the same `requestState` again, _without_ calling the upstream API.
5. Eventually the workflow completes and we return the final result normally.

If the client ever holds a stale value here, it's not that bad, because getting the upstream state with `DescribeExecution` isn't that slow, it's just slower than we'd prefer in this particular case. As a backstop, we can still do a hard rate limit on the endpoint for malicious clients via normal HTTP middleware, but that's a coarse-grained, static rate limit across all of that identity's requests to `tasks/get`, and we can be a bit more intelligent here.

Author: cc: @Randgalt if you have a walkthrough of your own use case to add (or if the ack-only methods are a problem) that would be helpful context here

Reviewer 3: Thanks for explaining. I think this makes sense and matches my thinking that `requestState` (I believe) can really only be used as a potentially stale cache for some upstream state -- rather than the authoritative truth for anything.

Reviewer 4: Our use case is to track a query in Trino. When the task is created, we will start/initiate a query in Trino. We need a place to hold the Trino query ID and other metadata. `requestState` is ideal for this. On each call to `tasks/get` we can decrypt the `requestState` and get our values to ask Trino for the state of the query. Note: this is a lot like a cursor-based page token in many public REST APIs (i.e. AWS). These page tokens are encrypted objects that allow the server to know that state of the cursor in the paginated query.

Realistically, we likely won't change the `requestState` after the task is created. So, we could live with the `requestState` being established with task and then being immutable. But, having it be mutable on each `tasks/get` seems a lot more flexible. Consider the page token example above; it will change on every get.

Author: Added language in https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f3ed02e251af0183a40333013e1512b34ac5ba0 to make the (lack of) consistency guarantees in `requestState` explicit, I think this works, then.

Reviewer: I think we are adding a lot of complexity here, for a process that is supposed to be stateful to help the server avoid state.

Given the race condition issues Peter flagged, and the SEP saying this is basically best effort anyway I think we should remove this for now.

Author: Removing for now: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2663/changes/3f1c3cfc6ae7049d235b7b23d16229cbce6679a8

Reviewer 4: For now or permanently? Are we losing support for a `requestState` in tasks?

# SEP-2663: Tasks Extension

> - **Status**: Accepted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Status**: Final
```
We can update this to final since there is no conformance test requirement since we are moving this out of core spec.
